---
title: 'The UK Genomics Market: Growth, Impact and Challenges'
date: 2022-03-01
permalink: /posts/2022/03/uk-genomics-market/
keywords: Genomics, Healthcare, Biotechnology, UK market, AI, Palantir, Open Targets, Precisionlife
---

# The UK Genomics Market and Its Growth Over Time

Genomics, the branch of science which investigates the genome, has experienced incredible growth over the past few years.

In the UK, the fast-paced development of this market started after the establishment of Genomics England in 2012, which is a government-owned organisation running the National Genomic Research Library. This includes over 100,000 whole genomes from patients affected by rare diseases and cancers[^1]. The foundation of Genomics England preceded a flurry of public and private investment into this space, which ultimately led to the establishment of multiple public-private partnerships such as the Open Targets Consortium. This platform aims to help researchers identify therapeutic targets and was founded in 2014 thanks to the collaboration of the EMBL-EBI, the Wellcome Sanger Institute, and GSK.

In parallel, numerous private genomics companies bloomed over the years; 154 solely in the UK, mostly located in Cambridge, London, and Oxford[^2]. These companies have contributed to the development of cutting-edge technologies with real-world applications, and together with public genomics institutions, define a market worth £5 billion, collecting 34% of all investments in the UK life sciences sector. The UK Genomics market is forecast to grow by 20% in the next 5-10 years according to a report by Deloitte in 2015[^3].

With both private and public efforts contributing to the development of innovations in the life science sector, let’s analyse how genomics data-driven companies are practically impacting this sector.

## The Impact and Practical Implementations of Genomic Data-Driven Companies in Health Care

The development of new genomic technologies and applications has, overall, affected and improved a variety of areas. This mainly includes disease prevention, patient screening, diagnostic and risk stratification, R&D drug discovery, and treatment response. Coupled with artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms, these technologies result in improved disease management, better treatments, and precision medicine.

The recent developments and investments in high-throughput genomics platforms, such as 10x Genomics, provide UK drug developers and clinical researchers the means to drive more precise and efficient drug discovery.

But how do Genomics data impact drug discovery? This was concisely explained by Adrian Ibrahim, Wellcome Sanger Institute Head of Technology Transfer and BD. Adrian argued that improvements in Genomics help manufacturers access increased yield of data, which are computed and interpreted for target identification and target prioritisation[^4]. The increased accessibility to large-scale genomics data comes at the expense of increasing difficulty in the analysis and interpretation of the data, often seeing the requirement for the application of AI and machine learning pipelines.

To address this issue, pharmaceutical companies are partnering up with big tech to adopt advanced computational strategies. Examples are Pfizer, which currently uses a machine learning system developed by IBM named 'Watson' for the discovery of cancer drug targets[^5].

Data-driven biotechs are also contributing to the drug discovery market by introducing new multi-omic-based technologies. In the UK, a successful example is Healx. This company, founded in 2014 in Cambridge, designed the Healnet platform which predicts drug response on rare diseases. The platform relies on the use of cutting-edge AI algorithms that analyse how diseases function and compare it to a comprehensive database for rare diseases. The system then looks upon a database of existing compounds looking at their mechanistic functions in the body. Finally, the algorithm compares all the above information to match existing compounds to the diseases. The platform is hypothesis-free and human-bias-free, promoting the identification of targets not previously linked to the disease[^6].

The use of AI in Genomics is not restricted to the identification of candidate therapeutic targets, as underlined by Dr. Steve Gardner, CEO of Precisionlife, a UK-based company founded in 2015. Gardner adds that the implementation of a multi-omic approach could also promote understanding of the genetic complexity underlying diseases[^7].

## Genomics Research and Data-Driven Companies and Public Health: A Rapport of Mutual Interests

The contribution of this industry has a direct and relevant impact on healthcare, constantly redefining the work practice. This has been well observed by Lord David Prior, Chair of NHS England, who said:

> "Genomic technologies have the power to transform patients’ lives by providing early diagnosis and personalised treatments."

In a recent account, David commented on the UK government’s Life Sciences Vision policy:

> "The use of data-driven life sciences technologies is central to the UK government’s Life Sciences Vision. We foresee an NHS where research is embedded as a core part of effective patient care to deliver our goal of a digitally enabled and pro-innovation clinical research environment."

Backing this vision, the NHS successfully trailed the implementation of a state-of-the-art data management system for covid-19 patients’ data named Palantir Foundry, a platform that allows for cleaning and integration of data into user-friendly operating pictures. In parallel, the UK government also worked with Lifebit to improve data management and accessibility for covid-19 patients.

## Limitations and Challenges in the Growth of the UK Genomics Market

Current limitations and challenges observed in the development of UK genomics and data-driven companies include limited communication between the NHS and private companies leading to slow-paced technological integrations; the need for updated regulations allowing for agile work frames while promoting patients’ privacy; rules on inventorship and patenting in AI; limited funding and support to early/mid-stage projects.

The UK government has introduced the new regulatory framework, ‘Software and AI as a Medical Device (SaMD) Change Programme’[^8]. This aims to provide a high degree of privacy protection for the patients while promoting the implantation of AI-based medical device software.

In spite of the benefits that this new regulatory framework provides for genomics and data-driven companies, it fails to address another persistent challenge these companies face; the ability to protect their intellectual property (IP) and to patent AI-based inventions.

The relevance of UK big data biotech companies within the life science sector is highlighted by how these companies raised £2.8 billion in 2020 only. However, funding challenges still remain in place for early-stage companies.

## References

[^1]: [Forbes](https://www.forbes.com/sites/alisoncoleman/2021/09/01/the-uk-genomics-startups-changing-the-future-of-healthcare-forever/?sh=16c3a8d85a51)
[^2]: [BIA Report](https://www.bioindustry.org/news-listing/new-report-reveals-strength-of-the-uks-thriving-genomics-sector.html)
[^3]: [UK Market Analysis](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/genomics-industry-study-uk-market-analysis)
[^4]: [Pharmaceutical Technology](https://www.pharmaceutical-technology.com/features/genomics-uk-report-2021/)
[^5]: [Pfizer News](https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/ibm_and_pfizer_to_accelerate_immuno_oncology_research_with_watson_for_drug_discovery)
[^6]: [BIA Digital Explainer](https://www.bioindustry.org/uploads/assets/71f252a0-d74c-4c25-ad31413a965975c2/BIA-Digital-Explainer.pdf)
[^7]: [PMLive](https://www.pmlive.com/pharma_intelligence/AI_and_genomics_a_revolution_in_drug_discovery_and_development_1341267)
[^8]: [UK Government](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/software-and-ai-as-a-medical-device-change-programme)  

---

## Notes  

This article was originally published in: [https://manchester.inno-forum.org/ai-and-genomics/](https://manchester.inno-forum.org/ai-and-genomics/)
This article was used for promotion of the *Big Data and AI in Genomics* event which I assisted in the making. A recap is available at: [https://manchester.inno-forum.org/1270-2/](https://manchester.inno-forum.org/1270-2/) 